# ClonalOmics

Python notebooks containing analysis of clonal gene expression, with a bit of proteomics and ATAC for good measure.

This repository was created and is maintained by [Marty Weissman](http://martyweissman.com), and he takes responsibility/blame for its contents.  The Python notebooks here analyze the data created by Jeff Mold, Michael Ratz, Carl-Johan Eriksson, and others from the lab of Jonas Frisén at the Karoliska Institute.  A paper will be submitted soon, we hope.

# Paper abstract (draft)

Cells of the same type often differ with regard to the expression levels of mRNAs and proteins. This has been largely attributed to the stochastic nature of transcription, resulting in fluctuations around the mean expression levels over rather short time scales. Such transcriptional differences have been implicated in the selection of cells during for example chemotherapy, where cells with a certain gene expression profile may escape therapy. Less is known of whether there, beneath short term stochastic fluctuations, exist stable, inheritable differences between cells of the same type. To study this, we analyzed the transcriptome and chromatin accessibility at the whole-genome level in single cells generated by individual naïve CD8+ T cells in response to an antigen in humans. Taking advantage of the clonal barcode that T cell receptors constitute, we show that that clonal transcriptional profiles are stable over years in vivo in humans and affect x% of genes. Clone specific gene expression profiles are not restricted to cells of the same phenotype within a clone, but remain after reactivation and differentiation to different lineages. The clonal gene expression mirrors inheritable chromatin accessibility, indicating that stable clonal epigenetic states dictate clonal gene expression profiles. Clonal gene expression is not specific to T cells or humans but we also demonstrate this in virally barcoded cells in the mouse brain. Long term clonal gene expression profiles adds a layer of diversity within cell types, which may influence for example developmental cell selection, plasticity, regeneration and the response to therapies.
